In the last lecture, we considered independent
joint control, which is an idealisation of
the real world. With independent joint control,
the motor torque has got two components. It
has a component due to the motor's inertia,
and it has a component due to the motor's
viscous friction. So, one is a function of
the motor inertia and the motor's acceleration,
the motor's viscous friction and the motor's
angular velocity.
Now, we're going to consider the more realistic
case of non-independent joint control and
we've added the so-called rigid body dynamic
terms here. What this means is the torque
seen by the motor on joint J is going
to be influenced by the acceleration of all
of the joints, the velocity of all of the
joints, and gravity. Now, I've introduced
a bit of additional notation here. It's the
subscript j and what that means is the jth
row of the corresponding matrix. So, this
is the jth row of the matrix M, jth row of
the matrix C or the jth element of the vector
G. For example, if I multiply the jth row
of the matrix M by the column vector, which
is the acceleration of all of the joints,
the result will be a scalar. This is a scalar
expression because it's about the torque acting
on joint J.
You'll see that there are two terms here that
involve joint acceleration. So, what I'm going
to do is consider the vector Mj in two components.
There is the component associated with joint
J and there's the component associated with
all of the other joints, which I've denoted
by M bar. I can do a little bit of rearrangement
now. What we have now is an expression for
the torque acting on joint J in terms of the
motor's own inertia and the component of the
inertia matrix associated with this joint,
the viscous friction, and then, we have all
of the other terms at the end which are the
disturbance torque.
This term here is the inertia of a motor
which is driving joint J. This is a variable
inertia term that we pull out off the manipulator
inertia matrix. We have the motor joint friction,
which is a function just of the motor driving
the joint, and then we have this rather complex
disturbance term on the end, which is the
acceleration of all the other joints, the
Coriolis and centripetal terms and the gravity
term. I can simplify it even further and we
now have a new inertia, I call that J prime,
which is a function of the configuration of
the robot. It's a function of Q. We have our
viscous friction and we have tau D which is
the disturbance torque lumped into a single
variable.
So, what are the issues that arise from this?
Well firstly, we have an issue because the
inertia experienced by the joint varies with
the configuration of the robot. In the last
lecture, we tuned our controller so that it
had a nice response in terms of settling time
and overshoot, but the tuning was a function
of the particular values of inertia and viscous
friction. Now, what we're saying is that the
inertia that the joint controller sees is
a function of the configuration. It depends
on all of the joint angles. So, that means
that the response of the control system will
depend on the robot's pose.
The other big issue is the disturbance torque,
that's a torque that’s exerted on joint J due
to motion of all the other joints, acceleration
and velocity and also, due to gravity. This
may lead to undesirable motion of the joint.
It may lead to path following errors, for
example. So, what can we do about these issues?
Well, a really simple technique is really
widely used in robots is to introduce a gearbox.
Most robots have a reduction gearbox. So,
the output shaft rotates a factor of G times
slower than the input shaft. G is the gear
ratio. The reason that this typically happens
is that electric motors are capable of running
very, very quickly, capable of very, very
high rotational velocity, but generally quite
low in torque. What a gearbox does is it allows
us to trade off some of this high angular
velocity for motor torque. Torque is actually
more useful than speed. We can see here the
relationship between torque and velocity on
the output side of the gear box indicated
by the subscript l. L meaning the load side
and torque and velocity on the input side
denoted by the subscript m.
If we now address the expression that we had
from the previous slide and introduce the
gearbox, we see the expression now looks something
like this. We can see that the effect of this
variable inertia, the inertia that's a function
of Q, is now being reduced by a factor of
G squared. If I considered the case where I've got
a reduction gearbox, where G is equal to 50,
this is a reduction by 2500. It's a very,
very significant reduction in this configuration
dependent inertia. It means that the motor’s
own inertia, this term here, will dominate.
The inertia will look more constant. We can
also see that our disturbance term has been
reduced by a factor of G. Again, if I have
a reduction ratio of 50, this term here is
50 times less significant than it would be
without a gearbox. So, a gearbox is useful
for many reasons and it's a really effective
way of reducing the effect of disturbance
torques and configuration dependent inertia.
A more sophisticated technique to deal with
this is to compute this disturbance torque.
Se tivermos um modelo dinâmico do nosso robô e
conhecemos a posição, velocidade e aceleração
de todas as ligações, então podemos calcular esse
termo de pertubação. Logo, o controle que é
mostrado aqui é efetivamente um controlador PD.
Este é o termo P. Este é o termo D, e
este é o termo feedfoward, com o feedforward,
podemos calcular a pertubação. Claro,
isso significa que precisamos com precisão os
parâmetros dinâmicos de nosso braço robótico
A terceira abordagem que podemos usar é chamada
de controle de torque calculado. Tem algumas semelhanças
mas também, algumas diferenças importantes para a
expressão de controle feedforward. Aqui podemos
ver um termo que é efetivamente um controlador
proporcional. Aqui, podemos ver um termo que
é efetivamente um controlador derivado. Eles
são multiplicados pela matriz de inércia e aqui,
temos o termo centrípeto e Coriolis
e o termo gravidade.
Quais são os prós e os contras dessas diferentes
técnicas? Uma caixa de câmbio é barata e simples.
Frequentemente, usamos uma caixa de câmbio em um robô de qualquer maneira,
para que possamos usar um motor de baixo torque mais barato.
Caixa de câmbio adicionam custo e peso.
Elas são ineficientes e fazem barulho.
O controle de torque computado deve ser calculado
a cada amostra. Então, se nosso controlador do robô
está rodando, digamos, a mil Hertz, então
a expressão que tínhamos no slide anterior
precisa ser calculada em mil Hertz.
Isso envolve o cálculo daquelas
matrizes, M, C e G e alguma multiplicação
de matrizes. Então, muita computação
precisam ser feitos. Antigamente, isso era muito,
muito difícil de fazer. Nos primeiros dias
da robótica, quando os computadores eram muito lentos,
era uma coisa muito difícil. Então, todos os tipos de
aproximações foram introduzidos, mas hoje
é muito, muito fácil fazer isso em uma frequência
como mil hertz. O controle feedforward
pode realmente ser calculado
em uma taxa lenta, e isso reflete a realidade
de que os torques dinâmicos não mudam
muito de uma amostra para outra.
Assim, o sinal de controle feedforward pode
ser calculado em talvez cinquenta Hertz ou cem Hertz,
enquanto o controle principal é implementado
em algo como mil Hertz. Eles
não precisam ser calculados na mesma taxa.
Para o controle de torque calculado e para
o controle feedforward, há um desafio
significativo em saber os valores reais dos
parâmetros dinâmicos de cada uma das ligações.
Para cada ligação, existem dez parâmetros dinâmicos,
como discutimos anteriormente. Então, para um robô industrial
de seis ligações, são sessenta parâmetros dinâmicos que
precisam ser identificados. Você pode fazer isso experimentalmente
ou talvez a partir de um modelo CAD do robô.